Raw pointer (#51)
ANSSI-FR/rust-guide: src/en/04_language.md

<mark>TODO</mark>: cyclomatic complexity of the macro expanded code, recursion
limits, ...
-->

## Value displacement

Values in Rust may have three distinct semantics when considering value displacement:

- Either it has _move_ semantics, this behavior is the default one.

> - Or it has move _move_ semantics plus the _drop_ semantics, i.e. its type implements the `Drop` trait.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Or it has move _move_ semantics plus the _drop_ semantics, i.e. its type has [_drop glue_](https://docs.rs/core/mem/fn.needs_drop.html) (by directly implementing `Drop` or by containing a field with _drop glue_).
```

- Or it has copy semantics, by having its type implementing the `Copy` trait.

However, some problem may appear when using the `std::ptr::read` function.
According to the [documentation](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/ptr/fn.read.html), the function:
> Reads the value from src without moving it. This leaves the memory in src unchanged.

> To be clear, this function is somehow copying the value pointed by the raw pointer, regardless of its type semantics.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To be clear, this function is performing a bit-wise copy of the pointee (value pointed to by the raw pointer), regardless of its type semantics.
```

This is a dangerous behavior as it can lead to double-drop and, in some cases, to double-free.

To illustrate the copy on a type having the move semantics let's consider the following snippet:

```rust
# use std::ops::Drop;
#
#[derive(Debug)]
struct MyStruct(u8);

impl Drop for MyStruct {
    fn drop(&mut self) {
#        println!("---Dropping an object---\nBefore zeroing: {} @ {:p}", self.0, &self.0 as *const u8);
        self.0 = 0;
#        println!("After zeroing: {} @ {:p}", self.0, &self.0 as *const u8);
    }
}

fn main(){
  let obj: MyStruct = MyStruct(100);
  let ptr: *const MyStruct = &test as *const MyStruct;
  println!("{:?} @ {:p}", unsafe { std::ptr::read(ptr) }, ptr);
}
```

We can see that a second object is created by the call to `std::ptr::read`, i.e. a copy of a _non-copy_ object is performed.

> Here, the problem is not really a huge one, except if some cleaning outside of the drop implementation is performed (as it is recommended): some sensitive data might survive within the memory.
> 
> However, this behavior might cause some resilience issue when this function is used with a raw pointer pointing to some data allocated on the heap with move semantic as illustrated by this snippet:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This causes problems of varying severity:

  - In some _rare_ cases (no _drop glue_, no non-aliasing guarantees, no _safety invariants_ attached to the type; basically when the type should have been `Copy` itself), it can be harmless.
    
  - In most cases, there may be _safety_ or _validity_ invariants (such as pointer aliasing, or rather, lack thereof) which make one instance become `unsafe` to use, or UB to use, the moment the other instance is.
  
      - Example:
      
        ```rust,no_run
        # use ::core::mem;
        #
        let box_1: Box<i32> = Box::new(42);
        let at_box_1: *const Box<i32> = &a_box;
        let box_2: Box<i32> = unsafe { at_box_1.read() };
        mem::forget(box_1); // `Box` non-aliasing guarantees invalidates the pointer in `box_2`
        drop(box_2); // UB: usage of invalidated pointer.
        ```

        See [Stacked Borrows](https://plv.mpi-sws.org/rustbelt/stacked-borrows/) for more info.
  
  - If the type has drop glue, then, when one of the two instances is dropped, any usage of the other may be causing a use-after-free, the most notable example being that the second instance will be, in and on itself, freed, causing a double-free.

    **This is Undefined Behavior, and is a source of major vulnerabilities**.

The following snippet showcases this double-free bug:
```

Reviewer 2: Does "`unsafe` to use" mean "dangerous to use", or perhaps "unsound to use"? To me, marking up the word "unsafe" as code would suggest that the use requires the keyword `unsafe`, which I suspect is both more specific and less scary than you mean (although I'm no expert on this).

Reviewer 2: I suggest the following copy-edit:
```diff
-   - If the type has drop glue, then, when one of the two instances is dropped, any usage of the other may be causing a use-after-free, the most notable example being that the second instance will be, in and on itself, freed, causing a double-free.
+   - If the type has drop glue, then, when one of the two instances is dropped, any usage of the other may cause a use-after-free, the most notable example being that the second instance will be, in and of itself, freed, causing a double-free.
```
(s/may be causing/may cause/; s/in and on itself/in and of itself/)

Author: @8573 I think `unsafe` here means dangerous to use. In fact, I am not sure about soundness here neither.
So you are probably right, it should be emphasized and maybe not quoted as code.

Reviewer: Yeah, for all these safety discussions about Rust, there is a distinction to have in mind and which is paramount, and it's a bit hard to try and inline its key ideas every time it is needed: https://www.ralfj.de/blog/2018/08/22/two-kinds-of-invariants.html

  - Basically, if you use [`.as_bytes_mut()` on a `str`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/stable/std/primitive.str.html#method.as_bytes_mut) and break the UTF-8 correctness of its slice of bytes, you have broken a _safety_ invariant, whereby calling non-`unsafe` code (such as `.chars().collect()`) can now cause UB (in this case, an out-of-bounds read from unchecked indexing in `str`'s code that assumes / relies on UTF-8 correctness as a safety invariant). But if you know no arbitrary library code will be dealing with the `str`, then breaking its UTF-8 will be harmless.

  - Whereas if you go an write any bit-pattern that is not `0b0` or `0b1` inside a `bool`, such as `0b10`, then you have broken a _validity_ invariant, which is an invariant _compiler code_ (≠ library code) was relying on (in the case of `bool`, for instance, to allow `Option<bool>` to still be `u8`-sized and with no-op conversions to/from `bool`, by mapping `0b0 → Some(false); 0b1 → Some(true); 0b10 → None` thus allowing `Some: bool → Option<bool>` to be implemented as the byte-identity)

___

All that being said, I agree that my inlined formulation wasn't very clear; I'd thus rephrase it as:

> […] which make one instance become unsound to _use_, or even unsound to just _produce_, the moment the other instance is […]

```rust
# use std::boxed::Box;
# use std::ops::Drop;
#
#[derive(Debug)]
struct MyStructBoxed(Box<u8>);

impl Drop for MyStructBoxed {
  fn drop(&mut self) {
#    println!("---Dropping an object---\nBefore zeroing: {} @ {:p}", self.0, self.0);
    let value: &mut u8 = self.0.as_mut();
    *value = 0;
#    println!("After zeroing: {} @ {:p}", self.0, self.0);
  }
}

fn main(){
  let test: MyStructBoxed = MyStructBoxed(Box::new(100));
  let ptr: *const MyStructBoxed = &test as *const MyStructBoxed;
  println!("{:?} @ {:p}", unsafe { std::ptr::read(ptr) }, unsafe { &*ptr }.0 );
}

> ```

Reviewer: Even though there may be a possibility to run code snippets, it would be nice, for instance, for people dealing with the PDF-rendered version of the book, to add comments mentioning what gets printed.

> ### Rule {{#check LANG-RAW-PTR | Avoid the use of `std::ptr::read` }}
>
> `std::ptr::read` might have undesired side effect depending on the way the type of the raw pointer is moving through different context.

> > It is preferable to use the operation of referencing/dereferencing (`&*`) to avoid those side effect.

Reviewer: 💯

Reviewer: You could even add that when the pointee `T` is `Copy`, the `*`-dereference operator does the same as `ptr::read()` (and since it only works for `Copy` types, it is way safer).

Author: What do you mean by:
> (and since it only works for `Copy` types, it is way safer).

I am not sure to understand it correctly.

Reviewer: This PR warns about the pitfalls of using `ptr::read` on non-`Copy` types, since it's an operation that is allowed by the compiler. But there is a similar operation, albeit restricted to `Copy` types, and thus, without all these pitfalls, which is the `*`-dereference operator. Hence, when the latter can be used, it should be, since it guarantees to the reader they won't have to care about drop glue, aliasing, or all these other issues (similar to favoring `.into()` to `as` casts, and favoring `as` casts to `transmute` calls).
